As-salamu alaykum warahmatullahi
wabarakatuh and welcome to the sixth
episode of the MH podcast, the Muhammad
Hijab podcast. I'm here with two special
guests, two very notable individuals
that are contributing contributing to
the academic uh kind of work and
knowledge production in the Muslim
world. We have Dr. Shadeed al-Masri, who
is a teacher in the Safina uh Institute.
Is that correct? Safina Institute.
Yeah, Safina Society. Yep. Safina
Society. Apologies for that. And we have
um of course
Professor Jonathan Brown, who um is well
known
uh and also a professor in the
What's the name of the university again?
Is it uh
It's not Chicago, is it?
It's Georgetown. Is it Georgetown?
That's correct.
Georgetown University. No, cuz you you
you got
Not to be
Not to be mistaken with George
Washington University,
which is also in DC. It's It's all in
the air now because you went to George
Washington University, didn't you? You
did your your master's.
Uh yeah, I went to GW, yep. Yeah, and
you done your PhD in in Chicago
University. So, it's all these names are
in the air, so we're trying to It's all
in the air. Yeah, I was going to bag on
George Washington uh Shadeed, but I'm
not going to do that now.
I don't want to be I don't want to be
rude. Well, with the consortium, I was
able to take 1/3 of all my classes at
Georgetown. So, I did enjoy that nice
musty library downstairs
[laughter]
and I spent hours there. I took classes
with Scott Redford, almost all my
classes.
Yeah. That's really interesting. He was
into like Islamic art, right? Uh
Scott Redford, his dad was like um some
politician who ends up being ambassador
in Lebanon
and he fell in love with the Middle
East. So, he went to Harvard, he became
an Islamic arts and architecture, you
know, guy and ends up uh being teaching
at Georgetown.
So, his classes were really good. Yeah.
Okay. Let's get started. What we wanted
to talk to you guys about today was some
of the controversial uh things that have
been in the air in terms of our
approaches as Muslims, community to the
LGBT rights movement. Uh now, I think
we're all on the same page uh from my
reading of your works
in terms of how we view
uh a man having sex with another man,
for example, the act itself and the
impermissibility of the act as per the
Islamic edicts and
uh understandings.
The question really isn't about this. Uh
The question is about how do we engage
as the Muslim community with uh LGBT uh
groups. Now, um what I wanted to do is
because obviously on the Yaqeen website,
you have you've um Dr. Jonathan Brown
has written an article, which uh Dr.
Shadeed al-Masri then responds to. It's
kind of like a refutation of that
um of that article. So, what I wanted um
Dr. Jonathan Brown was Professor
Jonathan Brown. I get confused
Hey, hang on. Let's just I I think maybe
we can just go with
I'm Jack.
That's Shadeed.
I think Shadeed, are you okay with that?
Works for me. Yeah, otherwise we're
going to spend half the half the podcast
is going to be
saying our names. Yeah.
That's right. Okay, so Jack, um
can you outline your position in terms
of what is this ratio um idea that
you've had? Yeah. Where did you get this
idea from? How did you come to this
conclusion?
And then we'll get uh
Shadeed to respond, inshallah.
Okay.
Okay, I mean uh sorry. Bismillah
al-Rahman al-Rahim. Um
uh first of all, thanks a lot for having
us on. Uh it's always a really pleasure
to talk to people in the UK or whoever
is watching this in the universe, right?
Um
I think uh first of all, I think you
actually introduced the issue
really well, uh which is
you know,
when when when we
when we Yaqeen, so me and Omar, sorry,
Sheikh Omar, right? When me and Sheikh
Omar um
uh
we're talking about doing this, right?
So, it was back You go back to kind of
2015, there's the Obergefell Supreme
Court ruling in the United States, which
basically makes gay legal gay marriage
legal in the United States uh
everywhere. And 2016, there was a
discussion at AMJA, the American Muslim
Jurists Association. Uh I think it was
in Texas. I can't remember where in
Texas it was that year. So, in AMJA,
there was like a whole discussion about
this issue, about the gay marriage
ruling and how Muslims should like fiqhi
position themselves and then socially
position themselves. So, um and like
exactly the same issue the kind of
exactly the same things that Shadeed and
I were discussing in that counter
counter point point counterpoint came up
in that discussion.
So, our our aim with that point
counterpoint was uh Yaqeen was basically
to say, "Okay, let's let's
show very clearly what's agreed upon,
right? So, the religious issue, we want
to show there's no disagreement on this.
So, there's no disagreement about liwat
is haram in Islam. We have a certain
understanding of sex and gender. Let's
just put Let's Let's put that aside so
that that's not going to get questioned.
Because otherwise, we're going to go
down the path of Muslims questioning
things that are malum min al-din bi
al-darura in our religion.
before we continue with with the words
in Arabic, could you translate them cuz
they're
Yeah, okay. So, things that are known as
you know, axiomatically as part of the
faith. For example, the prohibition on
on on homosexual acts in Islam is is
qat'i, right? It's It's absolutely
certain. It's known from the Quran, from
the Sunnah, from fiqh, from ijma, right?
Etc. etc., right?
Yeah. Um so, let's the idea was like
let's put this religious like dini issue
aside and then we'll be we're going to
talk about the political question. So,
what Now, Muslims, you know, we can very
clearly articulate what our religious
views are, how do we deal socially and
politically with the challenges in our
society. So, that was the idea was like
me and Shadeed are going to kind of or
Shadeed was, you know, he wasn't part of
the discussion yet, right? But it was
the idea is like we're going to set kind
of show the religious parameters very
clearly and then within the we're going
to get into the political discussion.
And there we're going to show what the
different perspectives are. So, I was
going to come out with this idea of kind
of engagement and notion of kind of
pluralism and create, you know,
promoting a sort of soft liberal
pluralistic society in which different
groups can kind of pursue their own
moral religious visions or lifestyles
under a shared protection of rights. Um
and Shadeed was, you know, obviously
going to take the position he took. So,
that was It was really about having like
a political discussion about how the
American Muslim community was going to
position itself socially and politically
on this important issue. One question
just before you continue on.
Yeah. Um
I'm not sure if everyone would agree
[clears throat]
that the two spheres are mutually
exclusive. So, in the sense that, you
know, we can have a discussion about
liwat and so on.
And that is a strictly
political discussion with no um kind of
religious ramifications. What do you
think, Shadeed, quickly before we
continue with this cuz there seems to be
an assumption here that Wait, wait, hang
on. I I would I would I would just want
to say I actually completely agree with
you, right? So, that that's that's That
that's exactly the kind of ground we
wanted to feel out in this discussion.
Sorry, go ahead, Shadeed. Yeah. Shadeed,
what's your position? Yeah. There's it's
a very important point, you know, that
Jonathan's making and and
uh
it what he's not doing what is not It's
not separating between religion and
politics, but it's really separating
between what's malum min al-din bi
al-darura and what is up for what's a
nazila,
a new matter that requires maybe some
qiyas and ijtihad. Can you translate the
translate the word? Sorry. The nazila is
a new matter that we are facing right
now. That requires
an ijtihad. We're not talking about
ijtihad like the four madhhabs level
ijtihad, but we are forced to make a
qiyas uh uh based upon and we're forced
to make a decision.
So, what does that what that does is it
removes the the the difference of
opinion from one of which would render a
person like a kafir rejecting that which
is known in religion. Yeah. zindiq. So,
it removes it from that and brings it
into the sphere of
a difference of opinion. I might feel
that you're you're
holding something that's sinful.
But
Shadeed, there's one thing I would want
to just kind of probe you on here with
this. Sure. I I agree with the fact that
no one's trying to classify anyone in
fact, you know, that's not definitely
not what we're trying to do. We respect
I think everyone respects one another
here and we don't feel like feel but
uh this dichotomy of either it being uh
something which is within the religious
scope that is difference of opinion or
uh something which renders someone a
kafir is something which someone might
object to. Someone could say there's a
third option here. The third option is
that what you're saying is batil. It is
outside of the religious parameters.
Um and it doesn't render you a kafir or
mubtadi or fasiq or whatever. Uh that
that is there as well. Like in the
religious literature, many things uh
batil meaning false, right? Outright
false. So, uh from a religious
perspective, the works of Ibn Hazm or
works of any of the scholars,
they uh will be things in them which we
could consider as batil, as incorrect,
as uh you Correct. Exactly. That's
exactly But it's not it's not going to
We're not going to now, you know, use
this to try and classify that individual
as X, Y, or Z, fasiq, kafir, mubtadi, or
whatever.
Yeah, or even let's say we don't
classify him, but the view itself, we
we've exited al-
al-kufr and the bid'ah and heresy,
bid'ah,
uh from We've exited that realm to a
view that can be either batil or so or,
you know, uh
correct. But if it
I once again I don't think there's a
problem with if someone says the view is
bid'ah,
it's different from saying that someone
And once again, this is I'm sure
everyone here knows it, but for the for
the um
kind of average viewer who's watching
this, if if someone says this view that,
for example, uh Dr. Brown has
is bid'ah, it's something which is newly
invented into the religion, for the sake
of argument. It doesn't mean now that he
is
the um to that, right? Or something
who's an innovator. So Yeah, which is
somebody that
but look like of course
Yeah. Of course this has been done. Like
that's the point of an azila, right? The
idea of an azila of this is
we have Muslims have not been in a
position that we know of in history. In
fact, as far as I know, no society
has been in a position
that we are in now regarding how modern
Western societies view
sexuality and gender.
Like this is it's it's it's an it's a
novel. So any you know, whatever our
discussion and our potential solutions
are almost certainly going to be
unprecedented
in our tradition. Uh so I think that
like using words like I mean I'm not I
know you're not trying to attack me or
something. But I mean I think when we
start talking about words like bid'ah
it's like yeah like obviously there's
we're in an we're in an unprecedented
situation. We're just trying to figure
out what is the way that
we uh
as Muslims I think I I I I Shadi I think
you can disagree with me if you if you
do but I mean I think our both of our
objectives are how do we as Muslims
preserve our faith and our community?
How do we do amr bil ma'ruf wa nahy an
munkar in the best way in our society?
How do we preserve our religion and
spread it, right? Because this is wisdom
and end in Allah that we believe
benefits people dunya wa akhirah, right?
So how do we do that best? Yeah. That's
the that's the discussion. Yeah. So what
is your position? How would you outline
it in a nutshell like
I've read obviously your article and
you kind of categorized or classified
different views, the rejectionist
view
and then you had your own rational view.
So how would you now in terms of
kind of abbreviate it in as
least words as possible, what is your
view in terms of how we should view the
LGBT movement?
You know, uh First of all, by the way
Shadi like if if I'm talking too much
just, you know, go like this and be like
hey man, you've been talking too much.
No problem. I'll put my hand up.
Cuz I don't I don't want I don't want to
distract from your your chance, right?
No problem. So I mean I I this is going
to really annoy you, Muhammad, but
I actually don't think you can talk
about it succinctly. Why? Because the
situation has changed so much since that
article was written.
Right? So 2019
article Yeah, we wrote that article I
think it was 2017. I can't remember when
it was that's
um it was the very beginning of Trump
era I think, right? So things have
changed so much. Like that article in
some ways is like it's obsolete not
because
um
because the discussion around the LGBT
the LGBT discussion has moved so far.
So things like gay marriage are not even
an issue anymore. Now it's issues of
like gender, how we understand gender in
schools, how we talk about uh
discrimination and things like that,
what our kids are going to be taught in
school in public schools. But that's I
think the bigger issue. And so but I I'd
say like you could look at it as a as a
developing discussion.
Um and so in that sense what I would say
is
the the question I was trying to or the
point I was trying to make in the ratio
which I think means rights affirmation
common cause Islamic orthodoxy or
something like that. I just made it up
when I was writing the article.
Um yeah.
Is
kind of what is the vision we have for
the United States as a country, right?
So uh one vision would be this kind of
um one could call kind of Abrahamic
[clears throat] tent vision, right? So
which is that the United States is sort
of this Judeo-Christian Muslim theistic
nation that honors God even though it it
grants religious liberty. It's sort of
the the substrate of the country is one
that respects revelation, that kind of
has a
respects natural law, respects like
human human beings linked to his own or
her own nature, right? And that nature
means something that it it has some
degree of claim or control over us, that
our own subjective identity doesn't
determine our nature.
Um and it so that would be one vision,
right? Um and it's sort of Muslims would
be allowed to function and flourish in
that society.
Uh the the criticism of that would be
that the Christian right in this country
is simply too Islamophobic
and too hostile to Muslims historically
and in the present to really allow
Muslims uh to exist in this country. Uh
and this is the evidence for this would
be things like the fact that in 43
states now there have either been passed
or proposed anti-Sharia bills that make
it illegal to follow Sharia in those
states. Um and you can imagine by the
way what that means it potentially about
things like marriage like Dr. Shadi's
marriage or my marriage, right? I have a
Sharia marriage which I have a little
certificate from the mosque. Someone
come and say you've broken the law by
having this marriage. I I hadn't
happened yet but that's just potentially
what might happen, right? Um and the
other vision is the kind of ratio vision
was uh that
this country would be much more like
pluralistic, diverse, demographically
pluralistic, morally, even legally,
right? And that you can imagine almost
like a millet system in the Islamic
tradition where you have basically
little communities. So there's Amish
people here, there's Christian people
here, there's Muslim people there. The
Muslims have their own schools, have
their own social associations, right?
And that the the law is the actual law
of the land is is is very minimal in the
way it imposes moral or cultural views
on these different communities. So
that's much more what we we talk in
political science as like kind of a soft
liberalism. So if you're familiar with
South Africa, much more like South
Africa where, you know, polygamy is
legal, all sorts of different animal
sacrifice is legal because you have such
culturally diverse country. Or as
opposed to what the United States is now
and Britain is now which is much more of
a hard liberal state where yeah, there's
freedom of religion, yeah, there's
freedom of
you know, moral beliefs but really like
there's you know, you polygamy is
allowed, certain beliefs are considered
intolerant, certain beliefs speech is
considered hate speech, right? So I was
really arguing that the US should go in
a kind of a more morally pluralistic
diverse direction. But I think the
problem is and this will be the last
thing I say um and I know we're talking
for a long time which is
if you look at the development of
American law since that article was
written 2017
it's we've gone further down not we we
haven't gone down the path towards
something that would make the ratio
uh um
view possible. We've gone the other way,
right? Which we've actually become more
uh hegemonic. There's like more of a
hegemonic um
progressivism and liberalism in our
society.
Uh and actually right now, literally
right now in the next few months we're
going to see with the Supreme Court
decision on what's called St. James
School, we're going to see I think
whether there's going to be the final
nail
in the possibility for really morally
and religiously plural country or uh if
that or if that's going to be allowed.
I want to ask one question one question
before I get Shadi on if that's all
right cuz um I think there's still
something to be said about the main
controversy about this particular essay.
So let me read something that you've
written. You said according to the ratio
position American Muslims should support
the right of gay marriage under US law.
This is really the crux of the problem
here
uh in terms of controversy because
people are saying
on what grounds on what Islamic grounds
um when you say the word should here is
this what in mubah? Is it is it
is it is it wujub? Is it obligatory? Is
it recommended? What what is the
classification
that you're making here? I mean
when you're saying we should in fact
engage in so much as we would support
the right of gay marriage doesn't this
seem very contrary
to the da'wah of Lut alayhis salam for
example who very much was opposed to
these kind of practices let alone
facilitated it. On what Islamic
I don't think Lut I don't think Lut
alayhis salam talked about gay marriage.
Well, he talked about sex between man
and man, right?
Okay, I mean look if if we want to talk
about sex between man and sex between
women, that's haram. Like if someone
comes and asks me, you know, what should
Muslims say about liwat? They should say
this is haram
and they should do amr bil ma'ruf wa
nahy an munkar on that. They should say
this is this is considered sinful in my
religion
and I don't believe it's pleasing to
God. The
the fight doesn't defy common sense that
if the thing is haram then the thing
which leads to it and facilitates it is
haram.
No, because you because you're not I
mean you don't uh
I don't know, you know, not to get too
graphic but you don't need to be married
to do this stuff, right? So like it's
legal. Like this liwat is legal in the
United States.
That's since
understand that. Yeah, but my question
is
I mean why as Muslims do we need to
support
gay
marriage in particular? Why have you
recommended this with
I don't I don't I don't support gay
marriage. I support the right to
marriage for gay people.
Why?
Why is that? Because because I I want
the same What is Look at what what is
the what was the gay marriage case
about? It didn't say it wasn't, you
know, can gays get married? It was is
does the government have a right to say
that marriage is only between a man and
a woman?
That's the that's the debate.
Right?
Now my marriage and my marriage as a
Muslim has nothing to do with the US
government. My marriage is between is a
contract between me and my wife, my
wife's family, Mhm.
in the eyes of Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
That's it. Like it doesn't matter if the
US government acknowledges that or not.
Okay, so this is like Muslim marriage
and and what is pleasing to God is one
thing, right? Now we have to look at the
issue. What What is the I have a
question. Do you want the US government
to say that marriage, the only marriage
that's going to be legally recognized,
is between a man and a woman?
I'm not politically
active in that sense. I don't I'm not
trying to persuade the US government to
do anything. Okay, so I what I want I'll
tell you what I want. What I want
Yeah, yeah. My position on my personal
position on the matter is that it it for
me the kind of the fire is
common sense, especially if you're
trying to use maslaha type arguments.
Like at one point it seemed like you
were trying to insinuate that because
it's kind of daruri, it's kind of
necessity now. That we need these people
to help us in order to they're they're
the only one one of the only groups to
help us, which is questionable actually.
The the gay rights groups. That so that
we should help them in the in in kind.
So
I'm not I don't I don't I don't think
that I say very Actually, I say very
explicitly in the article this is not a
quid pro quo.
This is not a quid pro quo.
Because it would be we are not allowed
to advocate for something that's haram
because somebody did something nice for
us.
So is gay marriage halal then?
Of course not. What do you What What you
I'm sorry to get upset like what
universe are people in that they think
it's halal? Like not only is it not
halal, but I've written the most
extensive
article rebutting any arguments that it
is halal in Islam.
Okay? If you say that zawaj zawaj
rajulain bil Islam halal bil Islam We're
not saying fil Islam. Okay, no. Then But
you said the word halal. Halal means
halal in Islam. Okay? No, in Islam in
general.
You want to say legal or not legal?
Yeah, yeah. That's not That's not even
It is legal. That That was already That
decision was made before this article
was written, right? It's legal in the
It's It is legal in the United States,
right? I just don't get it like
for for So is Are you Are you arguing on
maslaha grounds? So let me let me me me
me me repackage uh
Okay. Sorry, sorry. Shadi, go ahead cuz
you wrote a a refutation. What What is
your What I think Jack was just saying
right now
is that he's arguing that he does not
want the government involved in making
moral claims What's your position on
What's your position
That's a libertarian view.
Okay, what's your position on the matter
on What do you see as
You've written a response. So what Okay,
so one of my things is when I read
this about this interaction between the
Muslims and the law etc. One of the
articles that you could read that also
summarizes something I don't know if
it's exactly Jonathan's opinion, but at
the end Professor Fadel Muhammad Fadel
from Toronto
he writes in his article basically
summarizes
his position is that
if we allow
discrimination against gays in the
workplace
you open the door for Muslims to be
discriminated against in the workplace.
That's his argument, right?
Now he has to come up on the issue is
okay, well, are we therefore are we
supporting something that Allah
prohibited by doing this? By backing
that group, are we therefore backing
something that Allah prohibited?
He says, and this is where I'm going to
note my note my disagreement and note
where, you know, the seeds of secularism
are really in his article.
He notes that we are obligated as
Muslims to uphold the contracts that we
are upon and we're upon this, you know,
constitution and these
of the US and therefore by advocating
and supporting and fulfilling those
laws, we're doing our job because the
prophet said
believers have to observe their
contracts.
Now
my response to him
is that
protecting covenants and contracts
that's that part is correct.
But there's a condition
that the contract is valid and not what
you we said also bottom.
Right? So my my response to him is that
we're only supposed to observe contracts
that are in line with the sharia. Now
let's say
well, all of us our citizenship were
bound by
laws of nations that, you know, we would
never author, right? And aren't even
valid for us.
However, they became binding upon us
by virtue of our birth.
It that that doesn't necessarily mean we
support them, right? So there's a big
there is a this is tough seal. We're
constantly separating between matters.
Just because something is bound upon me
doesn't necessarily mean I support it,
right? I'm stuck with it. What can I do?
Okay? But I'm not forced to support it.
Just because I benefit from something
and that's what Jonathan
Jack was saying. Just cuz I benefit
something does not necessarily mean I
got to go and support it, right? So
that's those were my couple
other points on the issue of
this idea of supporting the rights of
LGBT just because the Muslims will also
benefit from that. I would say, okay,
yes, I may benefit, but I will sit back
and watch, right? I'm not going to
actively support. I may benefit. I may
not, right? So
those were my points and my main issues
were the separation of a political
judgment from a fit key judgment. Okay?
Or or from a moral judgment
as a method, that's a problem.
And as a
and as a concept of
covenants
we can't forget the condition for which
we are to support a contract or a
covenant or a law or whatever is that
it's valid in the sharia by the view of
the sharia.
All right? So so what is sharia?
Yeah, yeah. So for me what I was
thinking immediately is that and Dr.
Brown, I think we're going to run out in
5 minutes. We're going to have to
restart the session. If it does cut out
then we just start again, yeah? The
session.
So
I was thinking in my mind about okay, so
if we're arguing from maslaha
which it seems like effectively this is
what this is an argument from darura
maslaha
then maslaha can be, you know, maslaha
mulaya and maslaha mulgha. It can be
maslaha mursala.
But in this situation it seems that it's
very clear
maslaha mulgha meaning something which
is as you've mentioned, Dr. Shadi,
something which is in opposition to the
sharia. Mhm. Argument here is that if
it's something which you can't If it's
mursala, if it's something which is
mubah and the sharia hasn't spoken about
it or if it's mulaim, obviously the
sharia allows it itself or mentions it
in its text, then it's different. But
the issue here is that you have this
issue. If we take for example the the
view that gay marriage outside of
Islamic law, which is I think the
argument you're going to make is in fact
maslaha mursala and it's not mulgha.
Then you have a third you have a
secondary problem.
Which is what al-Ghazali mentioned is
mustasfa. The idea that for maslaha to
be mu'tabara, it has to be qat'i kulli
and it has to be daruri.
Now it doesn't seem to me you can make
the argument that it's kulli, that it's
it's for the collective interest.
But it's very difficult to make the
argument that this is qat'i. By in other
words, if we don't support the gay
rights movement on homosexual marriage,
that we will be in danger of for example
death or one of the darurat al-khams,
that there's going to be an impending
genocide that will take place. This is
where I think the whole thing, if we
want to make an usuli argument, would
literally flat fall flat on its face.
And I I I find it difficult to make an
argument after that because my question
then would be
if you can't prove it's qat'i, that
there's an imminent threat to one of the
for example darurat al-khams, one of the
five essential things that the sharia
came to protect
then on what usuli grounds um is this
argument being made?
So I I want to I want to be very very
clear. Like I don't even consider this
to be
This is not a
[clears throat]
usuli argument.
Okay. This is not a fit key This is not
a a fit key
This a political argument. I mean so I I
agree, by the way, I think Shadi makes a
really good point, which is that it and
you've also said this, right? Which is
that you can't really separate politics
and morality, right? I I I completely
agree. And And this is I mean the irony
about this is like
all the positions I've taken in my life
this is the position to which I'm least
attached, right? I mean I have
Um the um
[laughter]
came in like playing some stereo.
So
The um the So this is like I don't have
a
some attach strong attachment to this
position. I could well be wrong, right?
This is about what is like the What is
the decision that's best going to
promote Muslims and our ability to be
Muslim in the society. That's what I'm
concerned with. I'll get your point.
I'll get your point.
Um So here's the here's here's the
issue, right? Um
I
don't I've never advocated
for gay marriage, right? I've advocated
for
the change of law
that says that
I I advocate that it is not right that
the US government says that marriage can
only be between a man and a woman.
That's the only thing, right? So I if I
That's what I want That's what I thought
Muslims should support. Muslims should
support
the
minimal restrictions of what marriage
means in our country legally according
to our government. You know what your
your maneuver would have been better if
if you had not given a specific and went
back to the topic.
It would have If you had not entered
into a specific and just backtracked and
said, "I believe that the US government
should not determine
certain moral moral should not enter and
define certain moral matters." Okay,
yeah, I agree with you. Fine, that's a
good point, Shadi, but then I have a
question. Okay, so let's say that's what
you Let's say that's what we've decided
we're going to try and push for.
And now somebody comes and says, "Okay,
do you support this Which side of the
Obergefell case you going to come down
on? The one that says marriage has to be
between men It can only be between a man
and a woman or the one that says that
marriage doesn't necessarily have to be
between a man and a woman?"
If If that's our objective as we've as
you've suggested, I'm not saying that's
your opinion, but that your your
strategy that you're proposing for me,
right? Um
that would necessitate us taking the
quote-unquote gay marriage side in the
Obergefell decision. Right? So, that was
actually precisely what I was arguing.
Um because what I mean
that that may um
that might be a good position, right?
But I think that
that doesn't really reflect the real the
social reality in our country and
probably in Britain, too, which is that
people want to know what your opinion
is. Like you can't tell Muslim
No, no, but I mean you can't tell Muslim
kids in high school were getting asked
this question by their friends, you
know, that you got to give them an
answer. You have to give them You have
to equip them to answer these questions.
That's really what
I was trying to do is to help How do you
How do you equip young Muslims
with a way to think about this issue
publicly? But you know that sometimes
arriving at uh silence on a matter is a
thought-out uh process.
And that's the result is that I
literally cannot choose one or the
other.
Like you cannot choose either one. For
example, the left and the right.
Okay, in America and probably England,
same thing, worldwide, right? The the
nativist cultures in Europe versus the
uh the leftist.
Uh the the
I think the most accurate position is
that you cannot take a position. That's
a judgment that I've went through it and
you cannot choose a side because both
sides have something that we would stand
for and both sides have mutual have uh
non starters that we cannot ever side
with, right? So, it is a sort of
result It would result in we have to
form our own platform of things, right?
On things. So, our platform is going to
be very unique. We're dead against uh
racism on one side, right? We're very
much for um racial racial diversity,
equal distribution of wealth. Sounds
like all these like left-wing
uh things, right? But at the same time
we're we're not We don't support tax
taxation without, you know,
uh due cause cuz in Sharia that's an
issue. We don't support homosexuality.
So, it's not only we don't support it,
we're against it, right? So, our
platform is going to become a merger
that nobody recognizes,
right? And that's why
that's really the best thing to teach
our youth is that we have a platform
that's neither left nor right. I agree
with you.
I agree with you 100%. Yeah. And I've
actually not to promote my own work, but
like, you know, I've written about this
on Yaqeen on issues of toxic masculinity
and things like that. So, I agree like
the prophetic model is not a right model
or a left model, right? It's a prophetic
model. And we should, you know,
considering the
deadlock and the state of
non-functionality that American politics
and society is in right now and probably
British, too, right? Like people need
answers and we should provide answer,
which is that we have this prophetic
model. And just because you support the
idea that
the government should not define certain
things does not necessarily mean that
you have supported all the secondary
consequences to that. Right? So, it may
you may argue the wisdom,
but if I say, "Listen, government, Uncle
Sam, I don't want you telling us, you
know, uh what marriage is." Well, that's
true. He is He can't I'm basically
saying, "Uncle Sam, don't make Sharia."
So, that's actually a valid position,
all right?
Uh the secondary consequences of that
may be, you know, certain things that
are halal, certain things that are
crazy, right? Haram. But I haven't
necessarily
I'm not guilty of supporting those haram
things, right? So, the question may be
is it wise or is it not? Is the current
status closer to the Sharia or is are
those secondary consequences positive
and negative closer to the Sharia?
Well, actually um let me let me I want
to say something because
you know, to be honest, like in the
years since that article was written,
the way things have changed, have
developed, I honestly I I've become much
closer to Shadi's position. And I'll
I'll tell you why, right? It's It's not
actually
it's because of how
Okay, let me let me start again, right?
So, since
let's say the beginning of the Trump
presidency, right? Yeah. There were two
There were two options, right? So, there
was this the the kind of Democratic
Party that left, so to speak, right?
Especially progressive left left
embraced Muslims. So, there were two
possibilities, right? One is that And
this was always the danger that nobody
agreed with, right? Or that I know of,
right? Which was that Muslims
would
buy the progressive argument hook, line,
and sinker, drink the whole bottle of
Kool-Aid, right?
[clears throat]
Um that was what we were always afraid
of, right? That Islam would just become
an identity, you know, you have the the
like the the the Latino person, the LGBT
person, and the Muslim person. These are
just all these different equivalent you
know, minority groups.
Um
who all agree with the all the same same
moral vision. This was the danger,
right? Um so, then you'd have Muslims uh
celebrating things they can't celebrate
in their religion, right? Um
doing things like dancing in gay pride
parades. Muslims shouldn't dance in gay
pride parades.
You can't celebrate these kind of
actions. You can If you want, you can
say I support certain rights. I want
certain the law to be a certain way,
right? To protect people's rights, but
I'm not going to actually support a
certain lifestyle that I don't agree
with. The problem is that all the the
most prominent Muslims
involved in the kind of left-wing social
justice alliance have completely gone
They've They've They've drunk in the
Kool-Aid completely. And then they've
they've engaged in expressions that uh
really compromise
their positions as Muslims and make it
impossible for me as a Muslim to come
out and support what they've done. Now,
I will not I'm not going to gang up on
those people, right? You know, if I see
these someone like, you know, Ilhan
Omar, Congresswoman Congresswoman Ilhan
Omar. This woman gets so many death
threats from right-wing lunatics. She
has her own security detail provided her
by Congress. Okay?
So, this this is a This is a fellow my
Muslim sister. I will not
I will not gang up on her and engage in
some kind of public trashing of this
person to to increase the burden on her
shoulders, but I do not agree with some
of the things she said and done. And
in doing those things and in advocating
those things, she's made it effectively
impossible for me as a Muslim, I think,
to support her program. It's a very
difficult position. It makes me very sad
that this is the course that's happened
over the last two to three years.
I didn't I hoped it wouldn't happen, but
I unfortunately I think that's the path
we've been going down, which is I said
before is a path that is making the
ratio position almost impossible to
advocate for. As It's It's just It's not
a realistic possibility right now.
So, I just want to summarize Sorry, just
for you guys involved. I just wanted to
kind of summarize what I've understood
from from both
of you.
Um obviously, I think that about 2 years
ago when this article was was first
published, until now you're saying that
there's been changes which have made it
kind of impossible, very impractical,
to to advocate such a position and that
from the Islamic perspective, the
masalih wouldn't be
uh as maybe you you calculated them to
be at that time.
Um you also admitted really that this is
not an Islamic argument. You weren't
using the language of usul and fiqh and
all of these things. It was more of a
political argument. So, so you could put
it another way that this
this ratio approach has got nothing to
do with Islam in a sense.
And if that's Yeah, I I actually I
actually I mean I Yeah, in effect, yeah.
I would I mean I don't
I don't I mean I don't say it's nothing
to do with Islam because I'm Muslim and
I wouldn't be thinking about this stuff
if I weren't Muslim.
I mean it's not I'm not making some like
usuli argument, definitely not. Yeah.
So, it's not fatwa or something like
this or ijtihad
from a mujtahid or I mean, I'm sorry,
like what Are Muslims like smoking some
kind of weird drug or something? Like
when did this say as like this is a
fatwa? I mean, this is a
This is Are Muslims so immensely
unsophisticated that they can't actually
talk about political issues? They can
only talk about fatwas?
Yeah, you know, when you put something
on Yaqeen, the the issue is is is is
more got like an apologetic remit,
right? So, obviously, if it's got an
apologetic remit, people are thinking
that what you're going to be talking
about or writing about is
in line or at least um through the prism
of the religious discourse. So, I see
what you're saying. You know, it's not
something which is Islamic. It's
something which you didn't intend um to
be like in a fatwa sense and it's got
nothing to do with Islam. But then one
could question the fact that why is it
on Yaqeen then? Because Yaqeen is more
uh an apologetic remit. It's It's more
of a academic
No, no, no, that That's I mean, look, I
I understand that that you know, that's
your view and some people might view
that, but that's actually not One of the
things we were trying to do with this
point-counterpoint with you, Dr. and I
was actually to try and provide some
guidance and structuring the discussion
around this issue.
Uh so not in an apologetic sense. Like I
mean
Let me let me let me I I again I'm not
criticizing what you said but like if if
we're trying to promote some like
wishy-washy liberal brand of Islam, why
would we invite Dr. Shabir to give the
[laughter]
counterpoint? They would just have my
article and then be like Dr. Shabir is
an idiot. He can't write stuff here.
Well so you don't you don't invite
someone who gives an argument that you
know is a really good argument. Look Dr.
Shabir's argument is an excellent
argument. It's an excellent argument.
I said to this to the
this is my decade.
He What what what what could someone
could come back and say is that look
well actually what's what's going on is
that you're making it seem as if there's
a religious debate here. Well where
there's no religious debate according to
your own admission. Well what what
You're right. It's not a religious
debate. It's a political debate. It's a
political debate.
Yeah what it what it was is and
academics do this and maybe some people
aren't
really aware. But academics conduct war
games, right? Like what if we said this,
right?
Uh then what would the response I viewed
it as a type of that like it that
that your position was sort of a what if
what what if we did this or what if that
were the case sort of exploring an
option, right? And then my my job was to
come in and and be you know like the
when they hire a retired general come
and you're the opponent, right? And
let's just see if this strategy is going
to work in a war game, right? And so
that that was my job to poke all the
holes in it.
So what I that's how I felt that it was
and it's rather than you know a hard and
fast program that he's going to be doing
speaking tours on it. So that's how I
viewed it was just like
I'm really interested in the the soft
liberal type of war game where
we say what if it was promoted in a
society that every grouping
and I actually believe this is you know
probably better for us.
You you you forget citizenship of where
you're born. It's what is your law,
right?
What is your law?
That's a more accurate way to categorize
people than what land you were born in.
And then based upon what your law is,
that's how you'll be judged and
interact, right? Mhm.
[clears throat]
Okay. And so I I could say I'm Muslim
someone else could say I'm a progressive
liberal. Someone else someone And then
when I when I go to court with a Muslim
I'm going to go to court, right? In that
court. And then but we'd have to
extrapolate that because it's going to
lead to a whole bunch of different
clashes. But that's what There's a guy
in England and LSE. What was his name,
Jonathan?
Jack, what was his name that guy?
He put forth this idea that it's it's
this is a super soft liberalism.
Yeah, I know you're talking about.
by their law.
Uh he has he has like a really
um He's like your Eastern European.
Yeah, his name is impossible for me to
remember. I know you're talking about.
He's an Eastern Now the US has gone the
exact We're like fascist liberals right
now.
So it's but that but it's I think this
is I and this is the point I was trying
to make which was that If you go back to
like 2016 until and I I want to stress
this, we are going to see within the
next few months we're going to see a
shoe drop and it's either going to be in
this place or it's going to be in that
place. It's the St. James School case
that has to do with the scope of the
ministerial exemption which I sent you
guys readings on, right?
And if that scope is narrow, if it takes
if it takes a position of the ninth
circuit court
the ability of Muslims and other
religious communities to have their own
bubbles of existence is going to be
extremely limited.
If that case comes down with an
expansive wide understanding of what the
ministerial exemption is, then it's
going to make it a lot more possible
nothing close to what Dr. Shabir
suggested but a lot closer to what he's
suggesting than otherwise.
So that's what I was hoping is we would
go down a path more towards a soft
liberal morally pluralistic even legally
pluralistic society and not one in which
a
either a kind of progressive hegemony or
a Judeo-Christian Western European
hegemony was going to be enforced on
everybody in the country. In fact, what
we have right now is a battle between
these two things neither of which are
very welcoming to Muslims. Yeah. And we
should hope that Gorsuch maybe feels a
little bit guilty and owes one to the
right. Right?
that's what I I was thinking like when
that when the Bosa County
court decision came down, I was like
this is only going to work
if the St. James School comes with a
really expansive understanding of
ministerial exemption. So you say no no
no discrimination based on gender and
sexuality etc. etc. But the area in
which you can have discrimination
because of religious belief is going to
be big. Yeah. But if they make that area
small, it's going to be a disaster. It's
going to be a disaster and but this also
goes to show that that there are some
method methodologies that can last
longer than others. So a methodology
where it says listen, I'm just going to
go by you know the letter of the law.
I'm not going to
you know engage
in some kind of a
you know
political operation because the game the
game's changing constantly, right?
Everything's constantly changing and who
you have to be with now is you may be
you know it harms you later. So that's
where the idea of where when I make the
conclusion that I'm actually stepping
back. Okay. May actually end up
having you know a long-term stability to
that view because the game keeps
changing.
You know? And who knows that how Muslims
in the future will not be viewed as you
know these people of color that can be
banded into you know the minority
groups. We might actually be viewed as
eventually be viewed in with the
opposite side or in our own camp.
biggest my biggest fear in this whole
situation and I'll be honest with you is
when I especially when I go to North
America and interact with young people
my biggest fear is that when I actually
have conversations with them
um what it seems to me because you've
got people like Ilhan Omar and others
like her
who go to the gay the the
gay pride parade and they're dancing
around with with them. It's it seems to
me a lot of these young people have
this assumption or belief that people
like Ilhan Omar and others like them are
getting their
backing. They got the backing of people
like Jonathan Brown because of articles
like the ones he's written. Which if you
think about what he's said today
obviously what you've just said today
and Wait but hang hang on. I want to say
I wrote in that article
Yeah. against why Muslims should not go
in gay pride parades. I wrote in that
article a year before she danced in the
great gay pride parade.
The article
but to be fair what I remember you
saying was that Let me actually get
exactly what you said. You can you can
quote exactly what I say because I I I
gave precisely why Muslims should not go
in gay pride parades.
Yeah I don't think you said don't go to
the gay pride parade. What you said I
did I 100% said it. Go don't don't look
at a piece of paper, man. Go pull up the
website. Read the article.
No I've I've read it word for word.
Believe me. Believe me. I
I I was looking very closely at what you
said and because what you said about it
is that you
basically something to do with
uh they shouldn't Muslims shouldn't do
something to the effect of Muslims
shouldn't do something they're not
comfortable with. But you didn't make it
categorically clear that um a Muslim
should not go to gay pride parades. You
said you you nestled it in you couched
it.
No no no no no. No I'm going to be very
clear. I said Muslims should not
participate in gay pride parades. Go go
go I mean
Okay let me let me say something what's
going on with Jonathan
I'm going to I'm going to defend myself.
I'm going to find the website. I'm going
to read it to you guys. Okay while you
while you're doing that, let me make a
comment while Jack is finding it. That a
lot of people on the internet
people actually need to
learn usul of of how to make a
conclusion on the internet because
a single quote Let's say he did say
that, right? Well we have
in in the Quran
Yeah. you have multiple nasus, right?
And you have to bring all the nasus
before you make a conclusion.
All right?
this is this is a 45-minute essay. It's
not like a 70 7,000 words of the Quran.
It's it's much more easy to make a
conclusion. No no but a person an
individual
an individual an individual makes
multiple statements, let's say, right?
Yeah. In the course of a year two three
four years on an issue makes multiple
statements, right? So you have to couch
one statement that may be ambiguous. You
have to also put it in in line with all
the other statements, right? And see
uh Okay. I I have I I'm going to read it
to you I'm going to read it to you guys.
First of all Dr. Shabir Dr. Shabir's
position is correct and one of the
things I think we should be doing by the
way. I mean I'm not
you know you people like you
Muhammad Hijab people like Shabir who
really like have a podcast and stuff.
You guys need to raise the bar. You guys
need to pull Muslims up.
None of this like nonsense of I heard
this. Somebody told me that. Did you
really say this? Like it's easy. Okay
read read it out. Go back to the Go back
to the
Listen, I didn't [laughter] write I
didn't write like a 500-page book. This
is like you know
No but you have written a nice by the
way he's for those viewers who are
watching he's written a very good I
don't know how many page book it was but
it was about slavery which I recently
bought. Uh it was a very good book and
It's a doorstop. Yeah, mashallah. Okay,
I'm going to read it. I'm going to read
it. Go ahead, please. Uh I am frequently
asked by Muslim student groups about how
they should respond to invitations to
participate in gay pride parades which
can be let's just say a little bit too
edgy for Muslim sense of public
propriety and modesty.
My response don't lapse into thinking
that supporting someone's right is an
all or nothing relationship. Let's
imagine a comical Muslim rights parade
where Muslims parade with burkas and
long beards angrily chanting and
condemning physical contact between
sexes outside of marriage and crying
pork and alcohol. Would we expect our
allies from the LGBT community and other
groups to march with us? Of course not.
They'd be understandably uncomfortable
with some of these expressions of
Muslimness, quote unquote. Similarly,
Muslims can affirm their support for
some I wrote here for LGBT rights, but I
would say some LGBT rights, right?
Commit themselves to being
What did you What did you say? Some
No, no, I wrote I wrote I wrote LGBT
rights, but I made it very clear in the
article that I don't support all of
them, right? Um commit themselves to
being present at other rallies and in
efforts to lobby lawmakers without
participating in events that might be
outside of Muslim countries.
Okay, but you said they can commit
themselves to go to the rallies.
That's what you said.
You'll go go to a rally about
discrimination. Like if there's if
there's a rally, right, where someone
says, you know, uh we're being beaten up
or we're being abused by police, we're
being called names in public and
insulted. Yeah, I would go to that rally
and I'd be like, "No one should be
called treated like this." For sure. But
but Jack, right? You You just said here
very You said it You said You wrote it
yourself, right? You said that you can
go to the rally, but just don't do
things which are X Y Z, right?
No, no, no, no, there's
gay pride parade is not a rally.
Okay. Gay pride parade is a gay pride
parade. A rally is a political rally.
Yeah, but you can have a political rally
that's premised on on gay LGBT rights,
no?
I I have a There's a problem that always
comes up on this. And that problem is
that there is
uh a type of link where often times
normal human rights
like don't not getting beat up while
walking in the street is often times
couched as an LGBT right. And there's a
sometimes a confusion there, right?
get that, but I'll be honest with you.
I'm I'm an outsider and I'm a I'm a fan
of Jonathan Brown. I've got nothing You
know, I love Jonathan Brown from the
heart. I read his stuff and I share his
stuff and I
I've actually referenced you in one of
my books as well.
So
Thank you. This is not This is not from
a person who's a hater or someone to
catch you out. I'm just being honest
with you.
It's like the Muslims are all
complementarily trying to
achieve the same objective. What I'm
saying is this is that when when you
when I read that myself
my question is
uh my question to myself is he saying
that you can go to the rally, but not do
certain acts in that rally, for example,
maybe dancing or something like that.
So, in other words, it's not categorical
enough by way of prohibition. Like in
terms of if if your view is that there
should not be Muslims, young Muslims,
going to rallies which LGBT related. And
you don't want people to use your own
material as
um
as as a kind of backing for that or a
a way to to try and
legitimize that practice. That I believe
that the the phraseology in that in that
in that particular passage there was not
decisive. I have to be honest.
Okay, that that's You know what? I can
I'm happy to go and actually edit that
and say and cuz I didn't I didn't think
that
I didn't think of rally and the pride
parade as the same thing at all, right?
So, I will I'm I will go and I will edit
that and I will make it clearer. And in
fact, I'll even put in some rights
because I I wrote that very clearly in
other parts of the paper.
But don't you think it makes more sense
cuz you just said in this podcast that I
mean
you were being introspective and you
said that you've kind of moved away from
the whole racial approach. It's
something you don't really believe in
anymore and you move more towards
Shadi's opinion. So, just take this
whole thing down, really. Wait, wait,
hang on. I believe in the racial
approach. I don't believe it's been made
I believe it has been foreclosed on by
developments in American politics and
society.
I I I still believe in it.
So, what
But I don't believe it's I believe it is
much less possible now than it was
before.
What part of it do you cuz we've already
established that you this is not really
an Islamic argument. You've accepted
that the criticisms that okay, this a
lot of this stuff could be used um as a
way of justifying people, you know,
literally supporting things which might
be prohibited in Islam.
Don't you think
No, I haven't I haven't accepted that
people I don't think that's true. I
think if somebody looks at this article
and thinks that somehow I'm trying to
say that we should support
uh things that are haram in our religion
that that's just not accurate. I I I I
think that's not accurate at all. I
don't think that's
Okay, but the idea that you accepted
also you've accepted that something like
this article is not really meant um
is not trying to reason through the
Islamic paradigm.
It's not trying to reason to It is
actually a liberal It's a secular
argument. Like what like what Shadi said
in his article says Yeah, yeah, I It's a
It's a It's a
I'd say it's a
true
liberal argument. So, why would you put
that on Muslim website? It's a true I'm
actually happy to own that. Like, yes,
I'm making a soft liberal argument
for minimal state invasion in telling
people how to live.
But that's not your that's not that's
not who you are, Jonathan Brown. You're
a person who usually argues through the
Islamic paradigm. You're not a
progressive Muslim. That's the at least
how I interpret Well, like yeah, okay,
but let's like I I
I mean, I'm not I don't want to I have a
tendency to get really angry, so I'm
just going to like let's not When I say
that's a soft liberal
I'm saying when I say that's a soft
liberal argument, right? What I mean is
something exactly what Dr. Shadi was
saying earlier, which is
at in the West
and by the way, this is the state that
the nature of the premodern state in
general is it did not get involved in
people's lives. The state basically
provide law and order.
They had an army to defend against
invasions. And pretty much everything
else was up to the up to civil society,
right? Yeah.
The modern state gets involved in
everything, tells you what your kids are
going to learn when they're
kindergarteners, tells you what color
you can paint your house,
uh if you can have chickens in your
backyard, etc., etc., right? So, that's
the modern state. It's it's omnipresent
and it's invasive. What I'm arguing for
is a a true like original pure liberal
idea of the government not getting
involved in people's moral lives, right?
That people that a religious community
has a right to live its own life
and interact with other communities in a
society that is minimally invasive. But
like like Shadi said, if you said that
and not specified gay rights or gay
sorry, gay marriage, which you you
explicitly specified Muslims should
support gay marriage under US law.
I said the right to gay marriage. Yeah,
okay. Big difference. Big
Not the same thing. Big difference.
Okay, I agree. Big difference. No,
that's the same thing.
"Do you [clears throat] support gay
marriage?" I'd say, "No, I don't. I
don't believe this is pleasing to God."
What is he Do you believe in an Do you
believe in a law that defines marriage
as something in which gay people have a
right to marry because we all we're not
going to define marriage between man and
woman?" I'd say, "Yes, of course I
support that." So, you you basically
what you're saying then is you're saying
that you don't believe that the
government should decide on the form of
the marriage what it should look like or
how it should be defined.
Uh yes, exactly. Okay. You see You see
You see this? Yeah, if you said that,
there would be no controversy. I I I
genuinely believe if you said this if
you said it the way you just said it
now, which which I'm very happy with and
I don't have any problem. But if you had
that, there would be no controversy. But
unfortunately
because of the the possibility of
misrepresentation here
and
the
the the fact that some people could be
using what you're saying to say, "Well,
as Muslims, we're allowed to uh support
gay marriage or get the right to gay
marriage, which
uh for vernacular is for people in the
in in the lay audiences, they're not
going to really see the differences in
that.
It kind of rescues
the spiritual disaster that could be.
Right? People thinking that people
actually not knowing the dividing line
between what's halal and haram. That's
the I believe that's the biggest problem
that can come out of this. Like I said,
when I'm speaking to people in North
North America, many young people were
concerned. I have to say
They were saying, "This is what's
happening with Ilhan Omar. This is
what's happening with this Linda
Sarsour." And the other thing quite uh
not Sorry, I'm being but people like
Jonathan Brown Yeah, Jonathan Brown, I'm
sorry. Jack is staying quiet on the
issue. And in fact, it seems like he's
giving them the ammunition, you see.
Now, obviously we'd come back and say,
"No, it's not really as you think it is
and he didn't mean it like this." And we
we do have to learn and we try and argue
your case. But if if you If you have
things like
Muslims should support
um the right for gay marriage and you're
explicit, very clear
then I think that there can be that
uh tashweesh. Yeah, that can be that
confusion in the in the minds of young
people.
Yeah, look, I mean
Sorry, Shadi. I know I I want to give
Shadi a chance to talk, so I'm just I'm
going to say this and I'll let Shadi
talk, right? Um uh which is
you know
I I think there's a
I I've talked to people like
advisors of Ilhan Omar about this issue,
about number of issues that have come
up. And I've I've expressed my I've
explained my concerns in in the the
years since this article was published,
right? But as I said before, I I don't
think
I'm not going to do this kind of public
lambasting of of her or of another
Muslim sister, right? Yeah, yeah.
Um I'm not asking you to Yeah, so and I
have actually I have written about this
stuff
on my Facebook. Uh
I've said explicitly for I sent you
these things, for example, like on the
the the on the master piece cake cake
case or the Ashers Baking Cake Case in
the UK, I said the UK Supreme Court was
completely correct. It was It is
definitely the right of the baker not to
be forced to make a cake that
forces the
baker to engage in expression doesn't
agree with. So, I totally side with the
baker on this, right? I've explicitly
talked about issues of things like trans
uh education in for for young children,
things like the Birmingham school issue
uh where I said children should not be
exposed to this kind of issue at that
young age. Um so I've I've actually come
out a a lot and talked about these
issues. I haven't written a a Yaqeen
article about it. Um
Yeah.
And to be honest, that that's really
more of like a personal choice of mine.
Right. Um I don't want to get into
Yeah. I don't want to feel comfortable
getting into the the details of why I
haven't done that. But uh
I have
done my best on my social media to weigh
in on those things cuz I think they are
very very important. In fact, they are
much more important than the Obergefell
decision for Muslims. I mean, I think
and this is some of the stuff I I I was
sending you material on. The stuff about
what kids are taught in school, uh what
rights parents have to opt out of
certain classes. Uh this is
really really really a thousand times
more important because it it get When
you talked about you can't separate
politics and morality,
the the collision of those two is in
education, especially early childhood
education. Yeah.
My
So I understand that. Shady, what would
you want to add to that?
Maybe that that
uh the article that was initially wrote
uh written by Jack is uh and I don't
know what until this day why why why
they call you Jack. Um it was
potentially something which can cause
confusion. And would you be um
at least for maybe a complete re-editing
of that essay.
Yeah, I mean I I would uh
uh uh I mean if they want to re-edit,
it's up to them what to do what to write
and what's up to date and what's not up
to date. But the rebuttal, the fact that
they put the rebuttal is, you know,
that's also, you know, something to be
considered. And when people are going
off on the internet and youth and people
reading, I just want to keep it just
give people one point is that when you
look at a statement from an author,
uh the right way to make an analysis is
to look at all the state authors of that
statements of that author on a
particular point, right? Whether it be
the
Jami' al-Adillah. Yeah, Jami'
al-Adillah. And sometimes what I see is
going on is a little bit of unfairness,
uh not necessarily just to to John and
Brown, but
uh because as obviously I wrote the I
wrote a rebuttal on it. So that's my
perspective on that line or that point.
But it to a lot of people, one line is
taken. One image, one picture. And we
have a saying in that
Wujida al-ihtimal
batala al-istidlal. If there's a
possibility that
that picture does not represent 100% and
it could be explained away, then I can't
make a conclusion. So likewise, I I look
at a lot of people whose a quote was
taken from here here here here, three or
four, but five and seven and eight and
nine of the complete, you know, opposite
conclusion
quotes
Yes, yes. were not taken. And to me,
this is nothing less than slander in a
sense. It's it's an intellectual version
of slander where I would just take that
quote and ignore that evidence, right?
And if we did that in fiqh, we we'd
laugh, right? If someone eats in Ramadan
and says, "Well, Allah says kulu wa
shrabu, eat and drink. Allah said it,
right? Allah said it." But hold on a
second, he also said
fast Ramadan.
No, I I do agree I I do agree that has
been that that has been some uh mis-
quote mining and all these kind of
things, especially with Dr. Brown. And
and and I want to stress the fact that I
believe I have I'll be honest, I haven't
read too many of your um books. But
because I've
[clears throat]
actually read a lot of the articles of
Dr. Jonathan Brown and some of the books
and seen some of the work that he's
done. I mean, this is not to take away
from any work that we're just having a
conversation here about some of the
controversies that potentially
constitute the weakest link of your
portfolio of work that potentially needs
to be readjusted. And uh it's not about
um
you know, anything else. It's We want to
promote uh goodness and we want to
promote as we do as I as I said as I
said before, I've referenced and and uh
uh continuously actually led people to
some of your your work. Um it's it's not
It might sound like it's a deep
criticism. It's definitely not that. And
we're not coming from a point of trying
to label or cancel or anything like
that. It's not it's not from this
position. I mean, I would say I would
say this. I mean, I don't
I think that article I mean, it's funny
that people are still talking about it
as I said before because I think it's so
out of date. I mean, it's not it the
situation that the the the waqi'
the reality has changed so much since
that article that it's it's sort of a
pointless article to read now. Um So
what I would say without a doubt is and
I've been arguing, you know, we've been
discussing this Yaqeen for a while is we
need to write a kind of part two
about this issue now because we in the
Muslim community are in a very different
situation. I think one of the reasons we
haven't done it is because this St.
James school case is such a big deal. I
think when that case comes down, I think
at that point it's going to be really
time to
If you're going to get involved in a
discussion, which we did, right? If
you're going to get involved in a
discussion, you got to follow up, right?
I think at that point
we're going to have to write something
to address a lot of these issues. And
also Yeah, sorry. Yeah. Yeah, I'd like
to make the point that when we're in a
jama'ah as we are as colleagues, people
in da'wah, people who are concerned
about the matter, it's actually being in
touch with the jama'ah
has benefits like this. It allows for
maybe if I had a slip-up or I said a
word that didn't work out. Yeah. Um but
being in the jama'ah, and this happened
to me recently, right? Like I made a
statement that wasn't 100% accurate, you
know, in a mantiq uh definition.
But had I cut myself off,
number one I wouldn't have had the
benefit of being shown that there was an
error. Likewise,
if somebody had went attacked me so
viciously and emotionally, I would
myself not want to engage with anyone.
So therefore, I'll never be corrected.
So there's two opposites. There's the
one person who is arrogant, who doesn't
want to be part of the group. Then
there's like the rabid
um attacks on people rather than having
a discussion. And and how do we know the
difference, right? You know the
difference by someone's track record.
Someone has a track record that pretty
much they want to be part of Ahlus
Sunnah and they want to do the right
thing and they want to reach the right
conclusion, that person when if they
make a statement that I totally disagree
with, they deserve they've earned the
right of, you know, decent interaction.
Maybe can you explain? Can we discuss
this a little bit more? Very different,
much different than someone with a a
complete
uh completely insane view who has a
track record of other insane views. And
that point then yeah, you can bash him
all you want and trash him and and
ignore him cuz that he's proven himself
that that's what he wants. So there's in
in our dialogue, I think these these
points are important to realize that if
you go on that attack, you actually
disallow that person from ever
reviewing his work, right? And getting
to the goal that you want, which is for
them to see your perspective. So it's
all about these manners of ikhtilaf to
actually arrive us at the conclusion
that we want to.
I wanted to ask Dr. Brown one more
question that was probably um
uh as controversial if not probably a
little bit less controversial. It was to
do with um
an article written about salvation for
non-Muslims. Now, I'll be honest, I read
the entire article and I made sure to
read it more than once as well.
I didn't see anything in that article
that says that you have
the pre- the pre- pre- view or anything
like that that kind of view or the view
that all paths lead to the same truth or
anything like that. But then when I did
a bit more digging, I came across a part
of the essay which was uh removed. And
this is what it says. It says, "To be
clear, what follows here is just my
idea."
Um
It does also seems possible that God
could forgive the sin of shirk for a
reason other than repentance, perhaps as
an expression of his immeasurable mercy.
Um this was subsequently removed from
the article. Someone would argue then,
"Why would Why didn't you clarify that
this was removed and uh you know, in a
sense make the correction public?"
Uh well, I mean,
I actually can't remember what my
argument for
I can't remember what argument I had for
what I said. I can't I mean, that that
that's not the question you asked, but
I'm actually trying to remember like
what ev- evidence I had for that. I
can't I honestly can't remember. Um
but I assume I had some decent I you
know, some reason I thought it was
worthwhile. Um I'd actually So this is a
great example of exactly what Shady's
just talking about. So I wrote that
article Yes. and Mobeen Vaid,
for whom I have great respect,
wrote a public critique, very very
forceful,
serious, but extremely polite and
and respectful, you know? So something
that you couldn't you you couldn't hold
it against him, right? You had to look
at what he was saying. You had to take
Shady also talked to me.
And
and I I took I took that part and there
was another part I took out as well.
Very small thing.
Um
you know, why didn't I make it
Why didn't we make it public? I can't
remember. Honestly, I I can't remember
if we did make it public or not. Like I
was it there in the first place then?
What what did you intend by that meaning
that then you removed? So I went back
and I I looked at the article right now
and there it doesn't mention that it was
changed. And actually, this is something
we've discussed we've actually agreed
upon at Yaqeen that we're going to
like when there's a change made to an
article, you know, a significant change,
not like, you know, somebody added
something in a footnote. But when some a
change made to the article, that we're
just going to say this article has been
updated. Okay. But um
I mean, I so I honestly I can't remember
like what we did or didn't do in terms
of noting any change to that article
when it came out. But I mean I would
just say right now
like what I mean um yeah we we took
those two sections out those two
sentences out and that was it.
I mean I'm not sure what critics would
prefer would they prefer that we
have something at the bottom that says
what I originally said so that somebody
can get misled by them. I mean the whole
the whole idea is that you remove these
because they're confusing to people.
Right. So the idea that you would sort
of like remove them and then include
them in some kind of like
the only issue would be that if someone
had read it before and not seen the
correction that they can have the same
impression that you know that they've
already
seen that you know. I mean but then I
mean that would mean that we'd have to
have some kind of method of alerting
anybody who had read the article with
some kind of like ping
that a change had been made and that
just you know what that did like
that doesn't happen. I mean
uh
So I to be honest I think
look
I'm going to tell you what I think
really this is about right?
This is about people want me to engage
in some kind of like self-flagellation.
They want to like put me on a donkey and
parade me around town you know uh do
like tush read they want to do like tush
read of me. And like look I'm I'm sorry
I'm not going to you know look I I I I
100% accept criticism. I accept
criticism when it's done with incredible
edub and propriety like people like Dr.
Shabbi. I accept criticism when it's
done by complete a-holes okay?
If
someone's a it's a like a jerk
[laughter]
and there's No I mean if someone's like
a slanderous bloated jerk and they
uh they write something you know Dr.
Brown spelled this word wrong
that's a good point you know my my my
kind of my cool then for Burhan who fee
for liar you feel a man in a knock a
little right so you can if if someone
makes a point and like you you made a
point 2 + 2 is not 5
I got to change that doesn't matter if
the guy's nice or not. Yeah. So I'm
happy to take criticism. We Yaqeen are
very happy to take criticism.
Very happy to take criticism. I'm sure
you have a But I but but this idea of
like why why didn't you like come out
and draw attention to the mistakes you
made in the article?
Because the whole point is not to draw
attention to the mistakes because the
mistakes are misleading. Okay that's the
the
that the issue of that article. Um
And by the way those criticisms were
made I mean within I'm just going to say
like within days of when the article
came out uh if I if I remember
correctly. Yeah. Um
Uh so the other question you asked me
about was the issue of insulting the
prophet peace be upon him. Yeah I wanted
to ask you about that. I wanted to ask
you about insulting
In fact I just I I I that's fresh in my
mind because some genius just like
brought this up to me yesterday.
Like he's like the first person who
brought this criticism to my attention.
I was like oh thanks a lot man. Like I I
didn't where I was like have you been in
a coma for 3 months or something 4
months? When did this take place? When
did you make your comments?
I think it was the end of January. I was
in the UK. I was in um High Wycombe.
Oh yes yes yes. High Wycombe.
So uh
yeah I and I I wrote about this so much
online. I said
uh I I really regret my choice of words.
I shouldn't have I I regret my choice of
words. I regret I and I
at two by Allah subhana wa ta'ala I
needed the cut of Islam Rasulullah
salallahu alaihi wasallam be be
be be a slow been la
You embody la la la you embody the the
man lahu Adam Muhammad right? Yeah. So
um
I I have no problem uh
admitting my error right? Uh in the way
I talk. I I would if I had gone back I
would have said I would have used very
different words.
I do
still take the same position right? Um
so let me just be clear I I Your
position [laughter] is that you don't
want to tell anybody to insult No no no
no no no no I mean I'm going to explain
right? So I regret the the way I phrased
it or at two by Allah
the matter cuts right? Yeah. Two I do
not want anybody to insult the prophet
peace be upon him. And in a Muslim
society or in a Muslim country
I actually think it should be illegal to
insult the prophet. Right? And by the
way in societies where they already have
strict hate speech laws or
anti-defamation laws or laws about
public order and incitement against
strife places like Singapore even some
place like France I think that those
laws should be enforced equally and that
people should not be allowed to insult
the So something like Charlie Hebdo
should not have been allowed to have
those cartoons because Charlie Hebdo is
not allowed to have cartoons that for
example have anti-Semitic
uh or anti-Jewish uh
sentiment in them right? So I I think if
you're going to have a law that says you
can't insult
uh you can't cause communal hatred you
can't insult religious figures that
should be applied across the board and
it should not be allowed to insult the
prophet whether it's the West or not the
West right?
But in societies like the United States
where you don't have
hate speech laws. So there are no laws
of there are no laws against hate speech
in the United States as far as I know
it's certainly not at the federal level
right?
Uh I do not think that Muslims should
advocate laws that restrict speech
because it's considered hateful or
restrict speech because it insults
figures who are venerated because the
first people who will be
restricted in their speech because of
that will be Muslims. Quran yeah. And
and yeah I I and you've seen we saw this
in the UK. Go back and look at the all
the articles about the Trojan Horse
issue right? Look at the what the Ofsted
reporters said not in their written
report but in their oral mention in
their oral discussions they mentioned
how they went into the library of one of
these schools and it was quote unquote
filled with hate speech with hate
literature. What was it filled with? The
Quran right? So if you believe and you
can see this oddly enough in Muslim
countries countries like Indonesia
countries like Egypt right? Where they
have this thing now where you can't call
someone who's not Muslim a kafir
because it caused like imagine how how
are Muslims supposed to
talk about their religion or teach their
children their religion if basic things
in the Quran like criticisms of another
religious tradition criticisms of
another religious
beliefs calling someone who's not Muslim
a kafir if you can't do that or the
Quran itself becomes an article of hate
speech. So if by the way freedom of
speech laws or or hate speech laws are
never used to protect my to protect
vulnerable minorities like Muslims
they're used to protect the powerful
when minorities [clears throat] get out
of line.
Yeah I see what you're saying but I
think that this would become problematic
if you phrased it I'm not saying you I
mean obviously you've recanted what
you've said.
Or if you phrased it in a way which is
like I support
the the right for you know um
a person to insult the prophet. No well
well I I see this as a being the exact
same thing where
thing as the gay marriage thing isn't
it? Yeah you're yeah you're supporting
or you're supporting the idea that the
government
no longer
that the government doesn't engage in uh
judging I think it's more severe because
with the whole from what I understood
from Dr. Brown's argument with the gay
speech the gay marriage one is that he
doesn't think that gay marriage has any
place in the sharia like it's it's a
non-factor from that perspective. Like
gay marriage is it's just a it's nothing
it doesn't exist it has no sharia
um placement. Whereas with this sub bin
nabi
even if it's been done or which is being
insulting to the prophet Muhammad even
if it's been done to someone who is not
a Muslim there's clear sharia guidelines
on
the kind of at least attitude that we
should have to those people. So it would
be very I think it would send the wrong
message. If you say well I you know um
I support if you put it in this
phraseology I support the right for
someone to insult the prophet Muhammad.
That phraseology is extremely I'm not
saying you would endorse that
phraseology but
technically based on the also you put in
place
that statement wouldn't be bottom that
statement wouldn't be disagreeable to
the also you put in place. But I think
that you can
No no I I think it would. I mean both
whether it's whether it's liwat or sub
bin nabi these things are haram.
Yeah yeah. Religiously haram right? And
so if you if you had if you had a Muslim
government like a Muslim state right?
Uh liwat would be haram and sub bin nabi
would be haram. They'd be both illegal
right? If you did liwat you could be
taken to court and if you did sub bin
nabi you could be taken to court. Right?
Whether you're Muslim or non-Muslim.
Um so uh
I think that there are they're
I don't I I don't see a lot of
difference between them in the kind of
from the sharia perspective.
I I I think that there is a similarity
that Dr. Shabbi is bringing up which is
that
um it's it's looking at how do Muslims
thrive and function in a society in
which they are a vulnerable minority
right? So
uh that's why I I mean
I think that
it's it's my
I mean for example there's we talked
about this before like you know there's
there's a lot of people in the United
States who want to
who essentially want to make having
Muslim beliefs illegal right?
And you don't I don't want to give the
government any power
to make that happen
by giving the government power to
restrict speech to restrict belief
right? Um so that's why I I don't I
don't believe
in laws that restrict hate speech.
So, basically what you're saying is that
you you want the government to stop
legislating matters and become more soft
of a of take a soft liberalist approach
because we'd be able to breathe, too. Uh
So, that's really that's what I Okay, I
know what you're saying. Okay, I get I
kind of get this now, but what what I
would like to put in put forward um
submit to you guys today
I think you make it very if that's the
position you're taking, I understand it.
There's two things I would I would want
to suggest and I don't know what you
think of these recommendations, yeah?
Uh recommendation number one, if one
believes that there should be like more
of a libertarian approach in terms of
government intervention social matters
um
relating for example to marriage,
divorce
to religion, to morality, etc. If that's
the stance
uh then I would
stop there. Like yeah, instead in the
sense that I wouldn't build upon it and
say so therefore
I support the right of ex person gay
person to get married under US law or
that I support the right of a person to
insult the prophet uh Muhammad etc. etc.
because that secondary aspect is
where the shubha can come in. I believe
the shubha can come in. It really can.
It really really can. And people can
really confuse your statement which
you're building up on different usul.
Yeah, which now we understand, but they
can really really understand it as this
person has capitulated to Western
narratives and is bending over backwards
to try and please those individuals. A
secondary thing I would want to
recommend is
I think there's a big difference in
saying this would be better for the
Muslims. Yeah, in in the sense that it
would be better for a Muslim minority
in a Muslim land
for such law to be in place instead of
ex law instead of why law so it's better
it's
it's less of an evil
for example, it's the lesser of two
evils
to make that very clear and to use that
language the lesser of two evils for
this law to be in place
than this law than to say uh
this is what I believe should the law
should be this as if this is the aslan
the utopian um kind of consideration
that this is what we want the law to be
because for us the utopian thing is
obviously makala Allah subhana wa ta'ala
so
I think those two things if they're made
very clear
because I understand Dr. Brown now. I
understand what you're trying to say.
Yeah, I understand how you built your
argument, but if you
package it in that way, say look, I'm
not advocating that these laws are the
best laws. I'm saying this is a lesser
of two evils. It's better for the Muslim
community. I'm not in support of anyone
insulting the prophet. I'm not in
support of this and that. It makes your
position
very clear that it it's almost
impossible for it to be attacked in that
sense unless you're going to get some
mutatarifin or people from the you know
fringes attacking it, but from that
angle you're firmly within the prism. We
are firmly within the paradigm. You
don't need to come out of the paradigm
or become a liberal or to yani to write
full terms and to to to leave the usul.
I think if you do that then you've kind
of
cleaned it all up. You've mopped it all
up. What what what do you what do you
guys think of this? And and let me add
something else, too. If you if you put
forward the libertarian view as the
akhaff al-dararain the lesser of two
evils um
you can only be attacked on one as on
one side uh which we can close that
attack and that attack would be someone
saying, well, you're opening the door
to XYZ horrible things also being said,
right?
But you you would close the door by
saying that's a dhanni. That's possible
to happen. What's guaranteed to happen
is that Muslims will have their right to
do their to worship their uh properly or
worship as they see fit.
So, that's guaranteed and the guaranteed
matter you know, will take precedent and
is heavier than the possibility because
if you say government do not talk about
any speech, do not ban any books, Uncle
Sam, don't make tashdeed and don't get
involved
right? So, yeah, that means we can write
all we can have our Quran and write all
our books The thing yeah, sorry. And and
and someone say, yeah, but that also
allows for people to curse the prophet
We're saying we're against that, but
that's a dhanni. That's maybe.
And what's certain is that by this we
guarantee our right to to practice our
religion. So, that's just an argument
But the akhaff al-dararain thing is it's
very in the name. It's like the lesser
of two evils, right?
Yeah, they're both they're both evil.
But the rasho thing is that it's there's
not two options. There's the opt out
option. There's the rejectionist you
mentioned it like four or five
options. So, it wouldn't it would be
difficult to make a lesser of two evils
argument with the rasho thing. But I
think that uh with this situation where
you're talking about generally speaking
about laws which don't infringe would
you rather have laws that do infringe
and they would infringe the Muslim right
or would you rather have laws which do
infringe uh don't infringe and then
Muslims would be more protected in terms
of ibadat and etc. etc. Yeah. But I
think that initial initial framework if
you lay it out like that, then very easy
for someone to follow with you. Say,
okay, I understand what Yeah, which
There's no shubha there. Yeah, which is
why in usul al-fiqh
I was taught early on in usul al-fiqh
they actually tend to like to give
outlandish examples uh just so that you
don't get bogged down in the specific
example. And what happened with this
we know what Jack was saying is that I
think because the example was a a real
thing that's happening right now like
gay marriage or 70B, everyone's
attention went to that example. Yes.
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
Yeah. And I think if so, could we agree
then in terms of cuz
obviously what we're trying to do is in
the sense we're trying to
make um everything clear for the people.
I'm not here to try and you guys
mashallah both of you are senior to me
in every single way. I'm just giving you
my feedback from the from the lay from
the ground.
From from what I genuinely fear yeah, is
cuz I've had a lot of these engagements
with young people especially cuz my
demographic is from like 18 to 35.
There can be confusion.
Yeah. But it's it's forget about what
the letter of like we're not literalists
in that sense that you know uh the
exactly what he said and
the word is that it can be construed
in certain
Can we
on this topic here on these kind of
topics that we just talked about, can we
tighten it up in terms of making the
position very clear? Can we is can we do
it
a re-edit or a rethinking or you said
that you you're going to move more into
Shady's kind of
perspective on things. Can we reflect
that in the writings of Dr. Brown? Do
you think that that's something could
based on the feedback that we've been
getting from from the ground from people
that are just
observers and being confused by some of
those words or using it as um ammunition
to do certain things which aren't
Islamic or even make arguments which
aren't Islamic.
Okay, it would be a good idea.
I mean I I think that
on the second thing with insulting the
prophet alayhi salat wa salam
Yeah. I mean definitely getting feedback
on that was
um
like you know, it gave me a chance to
correct what I you know, correct myself.
Um
but
you know, I also want to make it clear
like I didn't write some article
where I laid out this argument for why I
wanted to say it's okay to insult the
prophet. Like you know, this was
Yeah. Yeah. That was literally I think
that was like 8:00 p.m.
on a day where I had gone to High
Wycombe given a talk in Birmingham
two talks in Birmingham
a talk in Ox High Wycombe. I mean I
literally it was like six hours of
talks. It was like the end of six hours
of talks, right? I know what you mean.
Um in the Q&A, right? Um
And so I mean I don't I I I obviously
have
already told you my position on what I
said, right? But I mean it's not like I
wrote some essay where I I drew
attention to this.
In fact, I would actually say that if
someone wanted to criticize me, they
should have contacted me personally and
said, hey man, I just saw this. What do
you think? Instead
just some of these people wrote like
started tweeting about this and being
look at how horrible Jonathan Brown is,
which I actually consider to be pretty
low. You know, if you really care about
me, if you really care about uh honoring
the prophet, then
uh then tell me about it and I would
have immediately had them take that out
of the video, right? But instead, you
know, that's not what people do. They
want to go and get their pound of flesh
and and insult their brother and stuff
like that. So, um I would say that about
the the thing about the LGBT issue
I think that what we definitely should
do at Yaqeen is to write another
cuz this thing needs to be discussed
again because the the reality has
changed so much Yeah. and the issues
have changed, right? So, gay marriage is
not an issue anymore.
There's a lot more issues around uh
education in schools notions of what
gender is, what sexuality is, you know,
issues around trans rights and stuff.
These are much more pressing and I think
that needs to be written about What
what's your view on this transgender
toilets? I mean, what's
Oh, yeah. This is I think it's so funny
people get so upset. I I don't
understand people get so upset about
this. So, like you know, my No, my gym,
you know, our gym in our neighborhood
which I haven't been to for God knows
how long cuz there's COVID-19 thing, but
Yeah. you you go in there and it's like
one room and there's like a bunch of old
dudes showering
you know, totally naked. When I was in
boarding school
I spent four years showering with like
20 other guys in one big room playing
soap hockey and trying not to get peed
on. That was what we spent four years
doing, right? Yeah.
Um
I want I don't want want that for my
kids, right? I don't want I have to take
my kids to this bathroom when I go to
the gym when I take them to the swimming
lessons. I have to go and be like Yeah.
you know, don't don't look
Oh my god.
Can I say something that was really
funny?
Actually, I think this is okay. Like
there's
There's this guy There's all these naked
old guys in there, right? So I'm like
going through and I'm like kind of like
guys can't don't look at this stuff,
right?
So this one guy is standing there and my
kid, thank God I taught them to speak
Arabic cuz he's like
uh Laysha Rajul hadam
and and man doosting door. Man doosting
door. Oh my god. I said like la and and
do the door like it's good like it's
[laughter]
I was like so scared if he said that in
English. Oh my god. It would have been
the end of the world, right? I don't
know if you want to edit that out or
not, but it was pretty So my point is my
point is like this is what I don't want
to happen. What do I want? It's very
simple. You go to a bathroom. There's a
door.
Open the door. There's a shower. There's
a toilet or if you're not in a gym,
there's a toilet, right? You close the
door. None of this like space under the
bathroom. None of this you can see
through the cracks. I'm not getting it.
You're saying you want men and women to
be in the same toilet?
No. What are you talking about? No.
I DON'T WANT
[laughter]
I DON'T WANT ANYBODY I DON'T WANT
anybody to be in the same toilet with
anybody else. Oh, okay. So Right? So you
go into a room. Imagine this. You know
in English in you go to the water
closet.
I want a water closet, right? You go in
there's a closet, you go in there's a
toilet and no one else is in there.
That's what I want.
And that if that's if that's made about
the trans thing was
I didn't even look at it to be honest. I
just Someone sent me Because I don't
know because people are crazy. I'm not
sure what they are what they think, but
they
Somehow they think that I want like men
and women
you know, going to the bathroom or next
to each other or something. That's not
what I'm saying. If you you have a sing
a bathroom, it's not even a stall,
right? It's a door I don't know if you
you've seen this in I don't know if
you've seen this in like your
universities and stuff or buildings,
right? So there's like a
In a lot of places there's like a men's
room now and there's a
women's room which has multiple toilets
in them. And then there's like a they
have this like gender neutral bathroom
which is just one
it's like just one toilet. It's only one
person for one person you're saying.
Yeah, that's what I want. Is everything
is just a bunch of one person toilets.
None of this like multiple toilets.
Well, what's that got to do with it? Why
does it have to be gender specific? Like
what you know,
what's the gender discussion about this?
Because that's the same thing that a lot
of trans advocates want.
Oh, they just want that?
No, they don't just want that, right?
But they want That's in terms of
bathrooms, a lot of trans advocates want
to have bathrooms that are just like
gender neutral single use single stall
So you're you're not advocating
for the ones like the the men and the
women going in together, you know? No,
my god. This is it That would be it
would be a nightmare. I would never use
it.
[laughter]
I mean who I don't know anybody who
wants that. Even women are like even
women get upset about this. They're
like, you know, you you can't go in and
like Women like you know, women go to
the bathroom they put on makeup on. It's
like a safe space. They talk, you know.
So it's basically like a disabled toilet
what you're saying. Yes, exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly. And I I love I go to those all
the time. You can make we do in it. No
one's going to bother you.
Yeah, exactly. And that's that's like
the only place The sink is usually quite
low, isn't it? Well, it's not a problem
for me. Maybe for you.
[laughter]
Yeah, I'm very I'm very tall. This is
the perfect
Yeah, I mean I've Yeah, I've seen some
of your vi- videos with that
You're like a black belt in Egyptian
kung fu, aren't you?
[laughter]
If only we had martial art like that and
we had civilized we had a good enough
civilization and culture to do that.
What's the most libertarian government
out there? I think it's South Africa,
right? I don't know.
Yeah, it's it's going to be South
Africa. And if that's the case, then we
should see that you know, there's a lot
of stuff going to thrive in South Africa
where we're fighting these fights
against really like an increasing
cultural fascism, right? Yeah. And what
it's doing is it's hardening it's also
hardening the Muslims, right? And when
they're hardening whether realize it or
not, they're actually taking a lot of it
out on their own kind.
On people who are actually on their side
who may have made an expression or a
statement that they didn't really
uh that wasn't exactly perfect or
according to them perfect or whatever.
We have this culture of
uh making Muslims
Ahlus Sunnah du'at really uncomfortable
with their own kind is a big problem. Uh
the bad we always say never scare your
kids
cuz your kids will then seek happiness
outside of the home, right? They'll seek
security and fulfillment outside of the
home. So they said always when you
discipline your kids, reme- keep that in
mind. Likewise, when we have people
doing commanding right and forbidding
wrong and trying to get to the the
right, you know, result and conclusion
of things.
If they do this in a way that disgusts
and injures in fact other du'ats
who are of Ahlus Sunnah as well trying
to do the same thing, right? Then what
they're going to do is people are going
to click off. They're not going to go
online anymore and many people will not
benefit from them. Whereas had they had
a moderate of discussion with them, then
the point would have been corrected and
the people would still benefit, right?
So there's everyone benefits. But what's
going on now is I don't know what it is.
People's pent up frustration with
COVID-19. Why is it that Twitter I This
is what I see. I don't know if you you
tell me. It's been taken over by these
like
Kharijite attitudes
of if you have one mistake, one thing,
we're going to meme you to death. We're
going to attack you. Half of these
people have no names. They have no
names. To be honest for me, I I
receiving end of a lot of that, you
know, my myself, but um to be honest, I
think it's good for my class. Like it's
really good because when you're just
consistently praised praised praised
praised, it that's the worst thing for
your
like psycho-spiritual state. Like
sometimes you just need to get this
praise.
Uh other you're just going to have
But uh would you do that to somebody
else? Is it a men do that? Not not me,
yeah, yeah. But I mean there's those
those guys those rodents out there.
Those those those flies or whatever you
want to call them. Yeah, these the Yeah,
they're out there. And they have a
function and the function is to keep us
all good and clean. Yeah, these these
cockroaches that's they're they're like
sort of cockroaches and rats and hyenas.
Really hyenas
[laughter]
They like to attack someone at the
moment that they're down and laugh at
it. And meanwhile, we don't even know
his name. He's like
Abu something or some silly name or
whatever. They're bots.
Yeah. Uh almost.
Uh I think that we really it's hard to
direct it cuz it we're directing it at a
general audience, but this culture to me
is disgusting and it's almost like Yeah,
no, I agree with this. Why am I part of
this, you know? Yeah, it's absolutely
true. And what I wanted to ask you guys
is maybe
as a general advice now cuz you guys
have you spoken about some of the
controversies.
Uh people I'm sure follow some of you
guys' work and
uh have read some of your stuff and
certainly has been effective. I mean
to be to because we've spoken about all
the controversies. Like some of the
stuff that um historical analysis
Jonathan Brown on slavery has I believe
genuinely saved some people's iman. I I
genuinely believe that. And um with
Shady Masri, I haven't been so as
familiar with your work until quite
recently, but once again, I'm very sure
that people have benefited from that.
Can Can I ask from you guys now
uh for people that are suffering from
doubts. I mean this is something Yaqeen
Institute has focused on quite often
quite a lot.
Doubts and trying to rectify them. Um
what kind of things would you recommend
as either actions or readings or
for for people that Muslims are growing
up and they're a little bit confused
with these topics of controversy within
Islam like slavery, like you know, I
don't know hudud which you've also
written about
apostasy, all these things. Um what kind
of general advice would you give a
closing advice would you give to people
in regards to dealing with their doubt
and tackling some of these intellectual
challenges. Let's start with Shady, Dr.
Shady and then we'll go to All right.
So I I would say look.
Yeah. You don't look at the specifics.
Look at the source.
Right. And ask yourself, do you trust in
this source?
Yeah.
If your answer is I 100%
believe
in Allah and his messenger and
that their words have been
protected and you know, the
understanding of Islam and the Sharia
and the mainstream Sharia is what they
intended. Okay? So there's two parts to
it.
Uh and I trust in Allah and his
messenger.
And I know that they are they they have
more knowledge than any of us are going
to ever have. They have more wisdom.
They have more mercy. And they're
seeking benefit for humanity. Okay? More
than I will ever
want those things or possess those
qualities.
If that's foundation is there
stabilized, then
it's a matter of just remembering that
whenever one of their rulings does not
sit with my head and I just have to
remember who Allahu ya'lamu wa antum la
ta'lamun. That's how simple it is. I'm
not com- I might not be comfortable with
a specific matter, then I should accuse
myself because I've already entrusted
I've already trusted the foundation.
And so I should remember that it's me
who myself who may not understand. May
yes, temporarily feel a hardship, okay?
And maybe I've
uh maybe I've misunderstood their ruling
to begin with as well. So I have to look
at who am I learning from cuz I may have
been learning from someone who's not
clear.
So these are the points that anytime
that this happens, we should go to these
simple points of remember who you trust.
Make sure you've understood their words
properly cuz maybe you have
misunderstood. Number two. And number
three,
remember to accuse yourself if you've
truly understood and I'm still feeling
something, why am I feeling something?
Who am I? Right? Look at me and look at
the universe. Allah created this
universe, right? So,
if we just go back to the source,
Yeah. and and realize that and also just
study with the right sources is the
right sources of education may clarify
what you have misunderstood about the
revelation.
Go on,
[clears throat]
I mean, I would say, you know, I would
say I would start by saying what Shady
said in the second part, which is, you
know, you have to find people who you
respect,
uh people who are good teachers.
Um and you have to find more than one,
right? So, like, you know, there's often
you hear people say like master fit to
mention master fit to mention to the
Messiah, right? So, like, you you you
have
it's if you you have to it's it's really
This is This is it's tough, man. It's
really tough
for Muslims in the West. And I mean, I
think it's probably true for Muslims in
the Muslim world, too, but it's a really
really really tough because it's really
hard to find good teachers. It's hard to
find people who can who know the
tradition really well, who understand
the reality around them really well, and
then who understand how to put the two
together. That is very very rare.
Um but between online lectures, between
people you know in your community,
between books, I think there's resources
out there. Yaqeen tries to be that type
of resource.
Uh Shady Safina Society tries to be that
type of resource. Shady's teaching is is
one of those resources. Shady's books
that he's written has book on tawhid
that I have
on aqidah, which is very good.
Um maybe you can do classes like that
online, Shady. I don't know if you
already have those
got to do that.
put those out for people, right? Um
so, finding people that you trust, and
but also realizing that those are
people, right? So, that's why I think
you have to have more than one. And and
then we've seen a lot of this
unfortunately last couple years, right?
Somebody puts their all their like for
them Islam becomes tied to this one
da'ee, this one sheikh, and that person
has some kind of problem, and then that
person then that Muslim's iman is
crushed. They don't know what to do. You
don't remember
these ulama are people. Scholars are
people. Leaders are people. They have
their own problems. They're imperfect,
right? And especially they face the
temptation. When you become a public
personality, you are faced with
temptations that you never imagined
having before that, right? Um
uh okay. So, that's the first thing. The
second thing I'd say is, and this is
this is really what I've tried to
hit over and over and over again in my
writings and in my my lectures, which is
have some humility.
Our world the modern world is a world of
immense arrogance in which whatever the
latest thing is, it's correct. It's the
best. Everything else before that was
wrong.
And that is not We are human beings. We
are species We are an animal. We are a
rational animal. We belong to a
tradition that has been around for
thousands of years, that has received
the wisdom of God for thousands of
years, right? That has been raising kids
and uh eating food and making bread and
drinking milk for thousands of years.
And the idea that somehow we're going to
come around and come up with some
totally new vision about how we're going
to think about reality and our species
and our bodies and everything, and
somehow that we're going to go and
prescribe this for everybody else when
we literally don't even know its its
result on our own society. I mean, look,
you know, my parents
and your you know, Shady's parents, you
They were like the hippies, you know,
the '60s and '70s generation. We don't
even have one full generation of people
who've lived through the sexual
revolution. Let alone seeing what that
does to their kids. Let alone seeing
what that what recent developments of
have done to families and to society.
And to go and say that not only does
everybody in the world have to live this
way, but if you don't view the world
this way, that you're some kind of
monster,
that is the pinnacle of arrogance. And
it's it's not just arrogant. It's it's
highly unwise. I mean, would you go and
and take a medicine and say without even
seeing its effect on someone's body over
the long term, go and prescribe this for
everyone else in the world, and tell
everyone else in the world that they are
a horrible person if they don't take
this medicine or accept it? This is
extremely unwise. It's unwise for us as
a species to make these kind of to have
this arrogance about the modern period,
about the present. So, that's what I try
over and over again is is if you really
study the past,
you realize how giant and enormous and
wide human experience is, and you stop
being
what makes us alone and what makes us
afraid is when we look at our religion
and we look at our beliefs that we're
taught and we we put them against these
these present standards that are given
to us that are that that that reign over
us all around us, we feel terrible. When
you look into the past, you realize that
this is a long story. We're not alone.
There's huge variety
in our species and in our experience and
our history. And that becomes something
that's comforting. That's why when I
wrote this book on slavery, that's like
I wanted to understand for myself, how
do I morally make sense of it? It's like
I'm not some kind of monster. Like, I I
hear about slavery, it disgusts me. How
do I make sense of this
as a Muslim? That's what I wanted to do.
And and what the conclusion I came to,
which really helped me and I hope helped
other people, is like it once you
realize that you know, in the grand
scheme of human history, that these
moral certainties are simply not moral
certainties.
Uh that is a very liberating is a very
liberating thing.
Uh and I think that humility it gives
you peace. It makes you a more
productive, helpful member of society,
a a member of society that understands
that other people might have different
views than you, that you still have to
live together and deal with one another,
which is by the way something that
people in our society in the UK and
Britain are increasingly not willing to
do, right?
Okay, those are my those are my two
things, my two pieces of advice. May
Allah bless you both. It's been a
pleasant very pleasant and uh
action-packed podcast. And obviously you
guys are welcome anytime to join me
again on this podcast.
Thank you very much, man.
All right. My pleasure, guys. Wa
alaykumu s-salam wa rahmatullahi wa
barakatuh.